In this lesson, we'll
talk about Atlas.
You'll learn what Atlas
is, what it's used for,
and take a look at
the Atlas interface.
Atlas is MongoDB's database
as a service solution.
It provides functionality to set
up your database in the cloud
without needing to configure
the fine details yourself
manually using the Shell.
Atlas also handles
replication, which
means your database maintains
redundant copies of data
to increase availability.
Let's talk a little bit
about how Atlas works.
Atlas users can
deploy clusters, which
are groups of servers
that store your data.
These servers are
configured in what
we call a replica set, which
is a cluster where each server
stores the same data.
This means that each time you
insert or update a document,
redundant copies are
stored within the set.
Using a replica set ensures
that if you lose access
to a server in
your cluster you're
not going to lose your data.
All of the servers
in your cluster
exist in the cloud
on the cloud service
provider of your choice.
So why should we use Atlas?
One main reason is the
simplicity of setup.
Atlas manages the details of
creating clusters for you,
which simplifies the
operational overhead of running
a deployment.
The Atlas interface
makes it easier
to manage and deploy MongoDB
across cloud providers
and regions.
Atlas is also a great way to
experiment with new MongoDB
tools and features.
In this course, you'll connect
to an existing Atlas cluster
and query its data.
You'll also create
your own Atlas cluster
and practice
inserting and updating
documents in your database.
You'll learn how to connect
to Atlas outside the Atlas
interface using compass,
which is a graphical user
interface for MongoDB
and the Mongo Shell.
Atlas has different
pricing levels
depending upon the size
and usage of your database.
In this course, we'll be
using the Atlas free tier,
which allows you to deploy
a free tier cluster.
A free cluster is a
three server replica set
with 512 megabytes of storage.
Free tier clusters never expire.
Under the free tier,
you'll have access
to a subset of Atlas features
like Charts and Stitch,
which we'll discuss
later in this lesson.
If you're learning
how to use MongoDB
or creating a small
scale application,
the free tier is a great
option for storing your data.
Now that we know what Atlas is
let's take a look at the Atlas
interface.
Note that the interface
might be a little
different in other lessons, but
the features we'll talk about
should be the same.
The main Atlas page shows
all of your clusters.
We can take a look at the data
in our cluster using the Data
Explorer by clicking
the collections button.
Here, we can see
all of the documents
within our databases and
search for specific documents.
We'll learn more
about how to filter
our data in the next chapter.
Atlas also integrates with
several MongoDB services.
These features are beyond
the scope of this course,
but you can explore them as
you learn more about MongoDB.
You can use the Atlas interface
to connect your cluster
with MongoDB Stitch.
Stitch is a serverless
platform that
makes it easier to use
MongoDB and your web
in mobile applications.
The Charts feature allows you
to create visual representations
of your data.
Atlas also allows you
to configure users
with different privileges
levels in your database.
This is important, because
as your database grows larger
you'll want to control
the data users can access.
Let's recap what we
learned in this lesson.
We defined Atlas as a
database as a service
that helps you deploy and
manage MongoDB clusters.
We learned about
how Atlas stores
data in the cloud in replica
sets to increase availability,
and we looked at some
of Atlas's feature
like the Data Explorer, which
we'll use in this course,
and Stitch and Charts,
which are beyond the scope
of this course.